9610

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Securing Federated Learning Against Extreme
Model Poisoning Attacks via Multidimensional
Time Series Anomaly Detection on Local Updates
Edoardo Gabrielli , Dimitri Belli , Zoe Matrullo, Vittorio Miori , and Gabriele Tolomei

Abstract—Current defense mechanisms against model poisoning attacks in federated learning (FL) systems have proven
effective up to a certain threshold of malicious clients (e.g.,
25% to 50%). In this work, we introduce FLANDERS, a
novel pre-aggregation filter for FL that is resilient to largescale model poisoning attacks, i.e., when malicious clients far
exceed legitimate participants. FLANDERS treats the sequence
of local models sent by clients in each FL round as a matrixvalued time series. Then, it identifies malicious client updates as
outliers in this time series by comparing actual observations with
estimates generated by a matrix autoregressive forecasting model
maintained by the server. Experiments conducted in several
non-iid FL setups show that FLANDERS significantly improves
robustness across a wide spectrum of attacks when paired with
standard and robust aggregation methods.
Index Terms—Federated learning, robustness, model poisoning
attacks, deep learning, anomaly detection, security.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ECENTLY, federated learning (FL) has emerged as the
leading paradigm for training distributed, large-scale, and
privacy-preserving machine learning (ML) systems [1], [2].
The core idea of FL is to allow multiple edge clients to
collaboratively train a shared, global model without disclosing
their local private training data. A typical FL round involves
the following steps: (i) the server randomly picks some clients
and sends them the current, global model; (ii) each selected
client locally trains its model with its own private data; then,

R

Received 27 November 2024; revised 18 May 2025 and 24 July 2025;
accepted 5 September 2025. Date of current version 17 September 2025.
This work was supported in part by Age-IT (PE8—“Conseguenze e
Sfide dell’Invecchiamento”) and SEcurity and RIghts in the CyberSpace
(SERICS) through the National Recovery and Resilience Plan funded by
European Union NextGenerationEU under Grant PE00000014, in part by
the Hybrid Prediction and Explanation with Knowledge Graphs—HyperKG
funded by Italian Ministry of University and Research through the Progetti di Rilevante Interesse Nazionale (PRIN) 2022 Program under Grant
2022Y34XNM, and in part by GHOST—Protecting User Privacy from
Community Detection in Social Networks funded by the Sapienza University
of Rome—“Progetti di Ricerca Grandi” under Grant RG124190FD55EB57.
The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was Prof. Shuo Wang. (Corresponding author:
Edoardo Gabrielli.)
Edoardo Gabrielli is with the Department of Computer, Control and
Management Engineering, Sapienza University of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy
(e-mail: edoardo.gabrielli@uniroma1.it).
Dimitri Belli and Vittorio Miori are with the National Research Council,
56124 Pisa, Italy.
Zoe Matrullo is with the Department of Statistics, Ludwig Maximilian
University of Munich, 80539 Munich, Germany.
Gabriele Tolomei is with the Department of Computer Science, Sapienza
University of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3608671

it sends the resulting local model to the server;1 (iii) the
server updates the global model by computing an aggregation
function, usually the average (FedAvg), on the local models
received from clients. This process goes on until the global
model converges.
Although its advantages over standard ML, FL also raises
security concerns [3]. Here, we focus on untargeted model
poisoning attacks [4], where an adversary attempts to tweak
the global model weights by directly perturbing the local
model’s parameters of some infected clients before these are
sent to the central server for aggregation. In doing so, the
adversary aims to jeopardize the global model indiscriminately
at inference time. Such model poisoning attacks severely
impact standard FedAvg; therefore, more robust aggregation
functions must be designed to secure FL systems.
Unfortunately, existing defense mechanisms either rely on
simple heuristics (e.g., Trimmed Mean and FedMedian by
[5]) or need strong and unrealistic assumptions to work
effectively (e.g., foreknowledge or estimation of the number of
malicious clients in the FL system, as for Krum/Multi-Krum
[6] and Bulyan [7], which, however, cannot exceed a fixed
threshold). Furthermore, outlier detection methods using Kmeans clustering [8] or spectral analysis like DnC [9] do not
directly consider the temporal evolution of local model updates
received. Finally, strategies like FLTrust [10] require the server
to collect its own dataset and act as a proper client, thereby
altering the standard FL protocol.
This work introduces a novel pre-aggregation filter robust
to untargeted model poisoning attacks. Notably, this filter (i)
operates without requiring prior knowledge or constraints on
the number of malicious clients and (ii) inherently integrates
temporal dependencies. The FL server can employ this filter as a preprocessing step before applying any aggregation
function, be it standard like FedAvg or robust like Krum or
Bulyan. Specifically, we formulate the problem of identifying
corrupted updates as a multidimensional (i.e., matrix-valued)
time series anomaly detection task. The key idea is that legitimate local updates, resulting from well-calibrated iterative
procedures like stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with an
appropriate learning rate, show higher predictability compared
to malicious updates. This hypothesis stems from the fact that
the sequence of gradients (thus, model parameters) observed
1 Whenever we refer to global/local model, we mean global/local model
parameters.

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS

during legitimate training exhibit regular patterns, as validated
in Section IV-B.
Inspired by the matrix autoregressive (MAR) framework for
multidimensional time series forecasting [11], we propose the
FLANDERS (Federated Learning meets ANomaly DEtection
for a Robust and Secure) filter. The main advantages of
FLANDERS over existing strategies like FLDetector [12] are
its resilience to large-scale attacks, where 50% or more FL
participants are hostile, and the capability of working under
realistic non-iid scenarios. We attribute such a capability to
two key factors: (i) FLANDERS works without knowing a
priori the ratio of corrupted clients, and (ii) it embodies
temporal dependencies between intra- and inter-client updates,
quickly recognizing local model drifts caused by evil players.
Below, we summarize our main contributions:
(i) We provide empirical evidence that the sequence of
models sent by legitimate clients is more predictable
than those of malicious participants performing untargeted model poisoning attacks.
(ii) We introduce FLANDERS, the first pre-aggregation
filter for FL robust to untargeted model poisoning based
on multidimensional time series anomaly detection.
(iii) We integrate FLANDERS into Flower,2,3 a popular FL
simulation framework for reproducibility.
(iv) We show that FLANDERS improves the robustness
of the existing aggregation methods under multiple
settings: different datasets, client’s data distribution
(non-iid), models, and attack scenarios.
(v) We publicly release all the implementation code of
FLANDERS along with our experiments.4
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II covers background and preliminaries. In Section III,
we discuss related work. Section IV and Section V describe
the problem formulation and the method proposed. Section VI
gathers experimental results. Finally, we conclude in Section VIII.
II. BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARIES
A. Federated Learning
We consider a typical supervised learning task under a
standard FL setting, which consists of a central server S and
a set of distributed clients C, such that |C| = K. Each client
c ∈ C has its own private training set Dc , namely the set of its
c
.
nc local labeled examples, i.e., Dc = {xc,i , yc,i }ni=1
The goal of FL is to train a global predictive model
whose architecture and parameters θ∗ ∈ Rd are shared
∗
across all
= argminθ L(θ) =
PK clients by solving θ
argminθ c=1 pc Lc (θ; Dc ), where Lc is the local objective function for client c. Usually, this is defined as the
empirical risk calculated over the training set Dc sampled
the client’s local data distribution: Lc (θ; Dc ) =
Pnfrom
1
c
`(θ;
(xc,i , yc,i )), where ` is an instance-level loss, e.g.,
i=1
nc
cross-entropy (classification) or squared error (regression).
Each pc ≥ 0 specifies the relative contribution of each client.
2 https://flower.dev/
3 https://github.com/adap/flower/tree/main/baselines/flanders
4 https://anonymous.4open.science/r/flanders

exp-7EEB

9611

PK
Since it must hold that c=1
pc = 1,Ptwo possible settings are:
K
pc = 1/K or pc = nc /n, where n = c=1
nc .
The generic federated round at each time t is decomposed
into the following steps and iteratively performed until convergence, i.e., for each t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T }:
(i) S randomly selects a subset of clients C (t) ⊆ C, so that
1 ≤ |C (t) | ≤ K, and sends them the current, global model
θ(t) . At t = 1, θ(1) is randomly initalized.
(ii) Each selected client c ∈ C (t) trains its local model θ(t)
c
on its own private data Dc by optimizing the following
objective, starting from θ(t) :
(t)
θ(t)
c = argminθ(t) Lc (θ ; Dc ).

(1)

The value of θ(t)
c is computed via gradient-based methods
(e.g., stochastic gradient descent) and sent to S .
(t)
(iii) S computes θ(t+1) = φ({θ(t)
c m| c ∈ C }) as the updated
d
d
global model, where φ : R P7→ R is an aggregation
function; for example, φ = m1 c∈C (t) θ(t)
c , i.e., FedAvg or
alike [13].
B. The Attack Model: Federated Aggregation Under Model
Poisoning
The most straightforward aggregation function φ the server
can implement is FedAvg, which computes the global model
as the average of the local model weights received from
clients. FedAvg is effective when all the FL participants behave
honestly [2], [14], [15]. Instead, this work assumes that an
attacker controls a fraction b = dr ∗ Ke, r ∈ [0, 1] of the K
clients, i.e., 0 ≤ b ≤ K, known as malicious. This is in contrast
to previous works, where r < 0.5. Below, we describe our
attack model.
1) Attacker’s Goal: Inspired by many studies on poisoning
attacks against ML [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22],
we consider the attacker’s goal is to jeopardize the jointly
learned global model indiscriminately at inference time with
any test example. Such attacks are known as untargeted [23],
as opposed to targeted poisoning attacks, where instead, the
goal is to induce prediction errors only for some specific test
inputs (e.g., via so-called backdoor triggers as shown by [24]).
2) Attacker’s Capability: Like Sybil attacks to distributed
systems [25], the attacker can inject b fake clients into the
FL system or compromise b honest clients. The attacker
can arbitrarily manipulate the local models sent by malicious
clients to the server S . More formally, let x ∈ C be one of the b
corrupted clients selected by the server on the generic t-th FL
round; it first computes its legitimate local model θ(t)
x without
(t)
modifying its private data D x ; then it finds θ̌ x by applying a
(t)
(t)
post hoc perturbation ε ∈ Rd to θ(t)
x . For example, θ̌ x = θ x +ε,
where ε ∼ N (µ, Σ) is a Gaussian noise vector. More advanced
attack strategies have been designed, as discussed in Section
VI-B.
3) Attacker’s Knowledge: We assume the attacker knows
its controlled clients’ code, local training datasets, and local
models. Moreover, we consider the worst-case scenario, where
the attacker is omniscient, i.e., it has full knowledge of the
parameters sent by honest parties. This allows the attacker to
crafting malicious local models that are close to legitimate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

ones, thus increasing the probability of being chosen by the
server for the aggregation.
4) Attacker’s Behavior: In each FL round, the attacker,
similar to the server, randomly selects b clients to corrupt out
of the K available. Any of these b malicious clients that happen
to be among those selected by the server will poison their
local models using one of the strategies outlined in Section
VI-B. Note that, unlike earlier studies, we do not assume that
malicious clients are chosen in the initial round and remain
constant throughout the training. We argue that this approach is
more realistic, as legitimate clients can be compromised at any
point in actual deployments. Therefore, an effective defense in
FL should ideally exclude these clients as soon as they submit
their first malicious model.
This category of untargeted model poisoning attacks has
been extensively explored in previous works [4], [6], [23]. It
has been shown that including updates even from a single
malicious client can wildly disrupt the global model if the
server runs standard FedAvg [5], [6].
III. R ELATED W ORK
FL is vulnerable to untargeted model poisoning attacks during model aggregation, where malicious clients can manipulate
updates to compromise the global model. Existing attacks
employ diverse strategies, ranging from noise injection to
sophisticated optimization techniques. These approaches represent key threats in FL.
A. Gaussian Noise Attack
This attack randomly crafts the local models on the compromised clients. Specifically, the attacker samples a random
value from a Gaussian distribution ε ∼ N (0, σ2 ) and sums
it to all the d learned parameters. We refer to this attack as
GAUSS.

E. FedMedian [5]
The central server sorts the j-th parameters received from
all the m local models and takes the median of those as the
value of the j-th parameter of the global model. This process
is applied for all the model parameters, i.e., ∀ j ∈ {1, . . . , d}.
F. Trimmed Mean [29]
This rule computes a model as FedMedian does, and then
it averages the k nearest parameters to the median. If b clients
are compromised at most, this aggregation rule achieves an
order-optimal error rate when b ≤ m2 − 1.
G. Krum [6]
It selects one of the m local models received from the
clients, which is most similar to all other models, as the
global model. The rationale behind this approach is that even
if the chosen local model is poisoned, its influence would be
restricted because it resembles other local models, potentially
from benign clients. A variant called Multi-Krum mixes Krum
with standard FedAvg.
H. Bulyan [7]
Since a single component can largely impact the Euclidean
distance between two high-dimensional vectors, Krum may
lose effectiveness in complex, high-dimensional parameter
spaces due to the influence of a few abnormal local model
weights. Bulyan iteratively applies Krum to select α local
models and aggregates them with a Trimmed Mean variant
to mitigate this issue.
I. DnC [9]

This attack shifts the aggregation gradient by carefully
crafting malicious values that deviate from the correct ones
as far as possible. We call this attack LIE.

This robust aggregation uses spectral analysis to detect and
filter outliers as proposed by [30]. Similarly, DnC computes
the principal component of the set of local updates sent by
clients. Then, it projects each local update onto this principal
component. Finally, it removes a constant fraction of the
submitted model updates with the largest projections.

C. Optimization-based Attack [23]

J. FLDetector [31]

This attack is framed as an optimization task, aiming
to maximize the distance between the poisoned aggregated
gradient and the aggregated gradient under no attack. By using
a halving search, one can obtain a crafted malicious gradient.
We refer to this attack as OPT.

This method is the closest to our approach. It filters out
malicious clients by measuring their consistency across N
rounds using an approximation of the integrated Hessian
to compute the suspicious scores for all clients. However,
unlike our method, FLDetector struggles with large numbers of
malicious clients, and cannot work with highly heterogeneous
data.

B. “A Little Is Enough” Attack [26]

D. AGR Attack Series [9]
This improves the optimization program above by introducing perturbation vectors and scaling factors. Then, three
instances are proposed: AGR-tailored, AGR-agnostic MinMax, and Min-Sum, which maximize the deviation between
benign and malicious gradients. In this work, we experiment
with AGR Min-Max, which we call AGR-MM.
Below, we describe the most popular defenses against
model poisoning attacks on FL systems, which will serve
as the baselines for our comparison. A more comprehensive
discussion is in [27] and [28].

IV. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
A. Time Series of Local Models
At the end of each FL round t, the central server S collects
the updated local models {θ(t)
c }c∈C (t) sent by the subset of
selected clients.5 Without loss of generality, we assume that the
5 A similar reasoning would apply if clients sent their local displacement
(t)
(t)
vectors u(t)
or local gradients ∇L(t)
c = θc − θ
c rather than local model
parameters θ(t)
c .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS

number of clients picked at each round is constant and fixed,
i.e., |C (t) | = m, ∀t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T }. Hence, the server arranges
the local models received at round t into a d × m matrix
(t)
(t)
Θt = [θ(t)
1 , . . . , θc , . . . , θm ], whose c-th column corresponds
to the d-dimensional vector of updated parameters θ(t)
c sent
by client c. However, the subset of selected clients may be
0
different at each FL round, i.e., C (t) , C (t ) for t , t0 , although
we have assumed their size (m) is the same. More generally,
to track the local models sent by all clients chosen across
1 ≤ w ≤ T rounds,Swe can extend each Θt into a d × h
matrix, where h = | wt=1 C (t) |, such that m ≤ h ≤ K, with K
being the total number of clients. Notice that h = m when
w = 1, whereas h = K if the server selects all K clients at
least once over the w rounds considered. At every round t, Θt
contains m columns corresponding to the local models sent
by the clients actually selected for that round. In contrast, the
remaining h − m “fictitious” columns refer to the unselected
clients. We fill these columns with the current global model at
FL round t, i.e., θ(t) , as if this were sent by the h−m unselected
clients. Note that this strategy is neutral and will not impact
the aggregated global model computed by the server for the
next round (t + 1), as this is calculated only from the updates
received by the m clients previously selected.

9613

Fig. 1. Empirical distributions of average TDMI computed between each
(t+1)
)
pair of consecutive local models sent by the legitimate client i(θ(t)
i , θi
(t+1)
),
when
this
runs
one
of
the
four
attacks
,
θ
and the malicious client j(θ(t)
j
j
considered in this work, namely GAUSS, LIE, OPT, and AGR-MM.

where p(·) is the probability density function and t0 = t + δ. If
(t)
each realization θc,k
in the vector θ(t)
c is independent from each
other, we can compute the average TDMI as follows [32]:
" d
#

 1 X
(t) (t0 )
(t) (t0 )
Avg TDMI(θc , θc ) =
TDMI(θc,k , θc,k ) ,
(3)
d
k=1

B. Predictability of Local Models Evolution: Legitimate vs.
Malicious Clients
We claim that legitimate local updates show higher predictability compared to malicious updates. This hypothesis
stems from the fact that the sequence of gradients (hence,
model parameters) observed during legitimate training should
exhibit “regular” patterns until convergence.
To demonstrate this behavior, we consider two clients
i, j ∈ C. Client i is assumed to be a legitimate participant, while
client j acts maliciously. Both are selected by the server over
a sequence of consecutive T FL rounds to train a global model
on the MNIST dataset. Therefore, we examine the local models
sent to the server at each round t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T } by clients i and
j. Specifically, these are d-dimensional vectors of real-valued
(t)
(t)
(t)
d
parameters θi(t) , θ(t)
j ∈ R , such that θi = (θi,1 , . . . , θi,d ) and
(t)
(t)
(t)
θ j = (θ j,1 , . . . , θ j,d ), respectively. Next, we calculate the average time-delayed mutual information
(TDMI)0 for each pair of
(t0 )
(t) (t )
observed local models (θ(t)
i , θi ) and (θ j , θ j ) across T = 50
rounds, where δ > 0, for both client i and j. This analysis
aims to discern the time-dependent nonlinear correlation and
the level of predictability between observations. We expect
the TDMI calculated between pairs of models sent by the
legitimate client i to be higher than that computed between
pairs sent by the malicious client j. Thus, the temporal
sequence of local models observed from client i is more
(t)
(t)
predictable than that of client j. Let θ(t)
c = (θc,1 , . . . , θc,d ) denote
the local model sent by the generic FL client c ∈ C as an
instance of a d-dimensional vector-valued process. We define
0
TDMI(θc(t) , θ(tc ) ) as follows:
Z
(t0 )
(t0 )
TDMI(θ(t)
,
θ
)
=
p(θ(t)
c
c
c , θc )

(t0 ) 
p(θ(t)
c , θc )
(t0 )
dθ(t)
(2)
× log
c dθc ,
(t)
(t0 )
p(θc )p(θc )

(t) (t0 )
TDMI(θc,k
, θc,k )

where
calculates TDMI for the univariate
(·)
case. Indeed, the d model parameters θc,k
should reasonably
be independent. Under this assumption, the joint probability
density function of the parameters factors into a product of
individual probability density functions, forming a product
measure on d-dimensional Euclidean space. Thus, according
to Fubini’s theorem [33], the integral of each parameter will
be independent of the others because the parameters are
independent.
To mimic the behavior of a hypothetical optimal FLANDERS filter, and therefore avoid the propagation of poisoned
local models sent by client j across the T rounds, we assume
that, at each round t, the global model from which both clients
start their local training process is polished from any malicious
updates received at the previous round t−1. Next, we calculate
the average time-delayed mutual information
(TDMI)0 for each
(t0 )
(t) (t )
pair of observed local models (θ(t)
i , θi ) and (θ j , θ j ) across
T = 50 rounds, where t0 > t, for both client i and j. Firstly,
we consider the special case where t0 = t + 1 and compute
the average TDMI between each pair of consecutive local
models sent by the legitimate client and the malicious client,
when this runs one of the four attacks considered in this
work, namely GAUSS, LIE, OPT, and AGR-MM presented in
Section VI-B. In Figure 1, we plot the empirical distributions
of the observed average TDMI for the legitimate and malicious
clients.To validate our claim that legitimate models are more
predictable than malicious ones, we compute the mean of the
empirical distributions for the legitimate and malicious client,
atk
θ̄i and θ¯j , respectively, where atk = {GAUSS, LIE, OPT,
AGR-MM}. Then, we run a one-tailed t-test against the null
atk
hypothesis H0 : θ̄i = θ¯j , where the alternative hypothesis
atk
is Ha : θ̄i > θ¯j . The results of these statistical tests are
illustrated in Table I, showing that, in all four cases, there is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE I
atk
O NE -TAILED t-T EST AGAINST THE N ULL H YPOTHESIS H0 : θ̄i = θ¯j .
E ACH C ELL C ONTAINS THE p-VALUE FOR THE S TATISTICAL T EST
C ORRESPONDING TO A S PECIFIC ATTACK . I N A LL F OUR C ASES ,
T HERE I S E NOUGH E VIDENCE TO R EJECT THE N ULL H YPOTH ESIS AT A C ONFIDENCE L EVEL α = 0.01 (p-VALUE  0.01)

enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis at a confidence
level α = 0.01.
C. Poisoned Local Models as Matrix-Based Time Series
Outliers
We, therefore, formulate our problem as a multidimensional
time series anomaly detection task. At a high level, we want
to equip the central server with an anomaly scoring function
that estimates the degree of each client picked at the current
round being malicious, i.e., its anomaly score, based on the
historical observations of model updates seen so far from the
clients selected. Such a score will be used to restrict the set of
trustworthy candidate clients for the downstream aggregation
method. Note that unselected clients will not contribute to the
aggregation; thus, there is no need to compute their anomaly
score even if they were marked as suspicious in some previous
rounds. On the other hand, we must design a fallback strategy
for “cold start” clients – i.e., FL participants who send their
local updates for the first time or have not been selected in
any of the previous rounds considered – whether honest or
malicious.
More formally, let Θ̂t = f (Θt−w:t−1 ; Ω̂) be the matrix of
local model updates predicted by the central server S at the
generic FL round t. The forecasting model f depends on a
set of parameters Ω̂ estimated using the past w model updates
observed, i.e., Θt−w:t−1 , where 1 ≤ w ≤ t − 1. Also, the server
sees the actual matrix Θt .
The anomaly score s(t)
c ∈ R of the generic client c at round
t can thus be defined as follows:
8
(t) (t)
(t)
(t− j)
ˆ
<δ(θc , θ̂c ), if c ∈ C ∧ ∃ j ∈ {1..w} s.t. c ∈ C
(t)
(t)
(t)
(t)
sc = δ(θ , θc ), if c ∈ C ∧ @ j ∈ {1..w} s.t. c ∈ C (t− j)
ˆ
:
⊥, if c < C (t) .
(4)
The first condition refers to a client selected for round t,
which also appeared at least once in the history. In this case, δ
measures the distance between the observed vector of weights
sent to the server (θ(t)
c ) and the predicted vector of weights
(t)
(θ̂c ) output by the forecasting model f . The second condition,
instead, occurs when a client is selected for the first time at
round t or does not appear in the previous w historical matrices
of observations used to generate predictions. Here, due to the
cold start problem, we cannot rely on f and, therefore, the
most sensible strategy is to compute the distance between the
current global model and the local update received by the new

Fig. 2. Overview of FLANDERS.

client. Finally, the anomaly score is undefined (⊥) for any
client not selected for round t.
The server will thus rank all the m selected clients according
to their anomaly scores (e.g., from the lowest to the highest).
Several strategies can be adopted to choose which model
updates should be aggregated in preparation for the next round,
i.e., to restrict from the initial set C (t) to another (possibly
smaller) set C∗(t) ⊆ C (t) of trusted clients. For example, S
may consider only the model updates received from the topk clients (1 ≤ k ≤ m) with the smallest anomaly score,
(t)
i.e., C∗(t) = {c ∈ C (t) | s(t)
≤ s(t)
c
k }, where sk indicates
the k-th smallest anomaly score at round t. Alternatively,
the raw anomaly scores computed by the server can be
converted into well-calibrated probability estimates. Here, the
server sets a threshold ρ ∈ [0, 1] and aggregates the weights
only of those clients whose anomaly score is below ρ, i.e.,
C∗(t) = {c ∈ C (t) | s(t)
c ≤ ρ}. In the former case, the number
of considered clients (k) is bound apriori,6 whereas the latter
does not put any constraint on the size of final candidates
|C∗(t) |. Eventually, S will compute the updated global model
(t)
θ(t+1) = φ({θ(t)
c | c ∈ C∗ }), where φ is any aggregation function,
e.g., FedAvg, Bulyan, or any other strategy.
Below, we describe how we use the matrix autoregressive
(MAR) framework proposed by [11] to implement our multidimensional time series forecasting model f , hence the anomaly
score.
V. P ROPOSED M ETHOD : F LANDERS
In Figure 2, we depict how FLANDERS computes the
anomaly score vector s(t) at the generic FL round t. Specifically, the server S uses its current MAR(1) forecasting model
f whose best parameters Ω̂ = { Â, B̂} are estimated from l
previous historical observations of local models received in the
previous rounds t − l, . . . , t − 1. It applies f to the previously
observed matrix Θt−1 to get the next predicted matrix of local
6 This may not be true if anomaly scores are not unique; in that case, we
can simply enforce |C∗(t) | = k.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS

models Θ̂t , i.e., Θ̂t = f (Θt−1 ; Ω̂) = ÂΘt−1 B̂. Then, it compares
this predicted matrix Θ̂t with the actual matrix of local updates
received Θt . The final anomaly score vector is calculated by
measuring the distance δ between each column of those two
matrices, according to Eq. 5.
It is worth remarking that, in general, only some clients
are selected at every round. In particular, if a client cnew –
whether it is honest or malicious – is selected by the server
for the first time at round t, the MAR forecasting model f
will not be able to make any prediction for it due to a cold
start problem (i.e., the predicted matrix Θ̂t will not contain a
column corresponding to cnew ). In such a case, we must adopt
a fallback strategy. Without any historical information for a
client, the most sensible thing to do is to compute the distance
δ between the local model update it sent and the current global
model.
In Section V-A we formally introduce MAR along with
how the training works. Then, in Section V-B we explain
how MAR is integrated into the server and how we calculate
the anomaly score vector s(t) . In Section V-C we illustrate a
step-by-step example, in Section V-D we provide the entire
pseudocode of FLANDERS, and finally Section V-E contains
the computational complexity analysis.

9615

e 2F
= ||Θt − f (Θt−1 ; Ω)||
= ||Θt − e
AΘt−1 e
B||2F
= `(e
A, e
B; Θt ),

(6)

where || · ||F indicates the Frobenius norm of a matrix. More
generally, if we have access to l > 0 historical matrix
observations, we can compute the overall loss function below:
L(e
A, e
B; Θt , l) =

l−1
X

`(e
A, e
B; Θt− j ).

(7)

j=0

Notice that l here affects only the size of the training set not
the order of the autoregressive model. In other words, the
forecasting model f will still be MAR(1) and not MAR(l),
i.e., the matrix of local updates at time t (Θt ) depends only on
the previously observed matrix at time step t − 1 (Θt−1 ).
Eventually, the best estimates Â and B̂ can be found as the
solutions to the following objective:
Ω̂ = Â, B̂
˚
= arg min eA,eB L(e
A, e
B; Θt , l)
8
9
l−1
<X
=
= arg min eA,eB
||Θt− j − e
AΘt− j−1 e
B||2F .
:
;

(8)

j=0

A. Matrix Autoregressive Model (MAR)
We assume the temporal evolution of the local models sent
by FL clients at each round is captured by a matrix autoregressive model (MAR). In its most generic form, MAR(w) is
a w-order autoregressive model defined as follows:
Θt = A1 Θt−1 B1 + · · · + Aw Θt−w Bw + Et ,

(5)

where Θt is the d × h matrix of observations at time t,
Ω = { Ai , Bi }wi=1 are d × d and h × h autoregressive coefficient
matrices, and Et is a d × h white noise matrix. Notice that
we drop the assumption made in Section IV-B about the
independence of parameters; in fact, the left matrix A reflects
row-wise interactions, and the right matrix B captures columnwise dependencies. This work assumes the temporal evolution
of the local models sent by clients at each FL round exhibits
a bilinear structure captured by a matrix autoregressive model
of order 1, i.e., a Markovian forecasting model denoted by
MAR(1) and defined as follows:
Θt = AΘt−1 B + Et ,
where Et is a white noise matrix, i.e., its entries are iid normal
with zero-mean and constant variance. To approximate such
a behavior, we consider a parametric forecasting model f , in
the form:
et = f (Θt−1 ; Ω)
e =e
Θ
AΘt−1 e
B ≈ Θt ,
et is the predicted matrix of observations at time t
where Θ
according to f when parametrized by coefficient matrices
e = {e
Ω
A, e
B}. Thus, the key question is how to estimate the
best model f , namely the best coefficient matrices Ω̂ = { Â, B̂}.
For starters, we define an instance-level loss function that
measures the cost of approximating the true (yet unknown)
data generation process with our model f as follows:
et ||2F
e Θt ) = ||Θt − Θ
`(Ω;

A closed-form solution to find Â can be computed by taking
the partial derivative of the loss w.r.t. A, setting it to 0, and
solving it for A. In other words, we search for Â = A, such
that:
∂L( A, B; Θt , l)
= 0.
(9)
∂A
Using Eq. (7) and Eq. (6), the left-hand side of Eq. (9) can
be rewritten as follows:
Pl−1
2
∂L( A, B; Θt , l) ∂ j=0 ||Θt− j − AΘt− j−1 B||F
=
=
∂A
∂A
l−1
X
= −2
(Θt− j − AΘt− j−1 BT )BΘTt−1
j=0

0
1
 X
l−1
= −2 @
Θt− j BΘTt− j−1 A
j=0

0
− A@

l−1
X

1


Θt− j−1 BT BΘTt− j−1 A .

(10)

j=0

If we set Eq. (10) to 0 and solve it for A, we find:
20
1
l−1
X
Θt− j BΘTt− j−1 A
− 2 4@
j=0

13
0
l−1
X
Θt− j−1 BT BΘTt− j−1 A5 = 0.
−A @
j=0

By applying basic algebraic rules, the closed-form solution
for A is:
P

l−1
T
j=0 Θt− j BΘt− j−1
.
A = P
(11)
l−1
T
T
j=0 Θt− j−1 B BΘt− j−1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9616

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

If we apply the same reasoning, we can also find a closedform solution to compute B̂. That is, we take the partial
derivative of the loss w.r.t. B, set it to 0, and solve it for
B:
∂L(A, B; Θt , l)
= 0.
(12)
∂B
Eventually, we obtain the following:
P

l−1
T
j=0 Θt− j AΘt− j−1
.
(13)
B = P
l−1
T
T
A
AΘ
Θ
t−
j−1
j=0 t− j−1
We now have two closed-form solutions; one for A (see Eq.
(11)) and one for B (see Eq. (13)).
However, the solution to A involves B, and the solution to
B involves A. In other words, we must know B to compute
A and vice versa.
We can use the standard Alternating Least Squares (ALS)
algorithm ([34]) to solve such a problem.
The fundamental idea is to iteratively update the least
squares closed-form solution of each variable alternately, keeping the other fixed. At the generic i-th iteration, we compute:
P
A(i+1) = P

l−1
(i) T
j=0 Θt− j B Θt− j−1

l−1
(i) T (i) T
j=0 Θt− j−1 (B ) B Θt− j−1

P
l−1
B(i+1) = P



T
(i+1)
Θt− j−1
j=0 Θt− j A

;



l−1
T
(i+1) T (i+1)
) A
Θt− j−1
j=0 Θt− j−1 ( A

.

ALS repeats the two steps above until some convergence criterion is met, e.g., after a specific number of iterations N or when
the distance between the values of the variables computed
in two consecutive iterations is smaller than a given positive
threshold, i.e., d( A(i+1) − A(i) ) < ε and d(B(i+1) − B(i) ) < ε,
where d(·) is any suitable matrix distance function and ε ∈ R>0 .
Eventually, if A(∞) and B(∞) are the parameters of the MAR
model upon convergence, we set Â = A(∞) and B̂ = B(∞) as
the best coefficient matrices.
B. MAR-Based Anomaly Score
Our approach consists of two primary steps: (i) MAR
estimation and (ii) anomaly score computation.
1) MAR Estimation: At the first FL round (t = 1), the
server sends the initial global model θ(1) to the set of m
selected clients C (1) and collects from them the d×m matrix of
updated models Θ1 . Hence, it computes the new global model
(1)
θ(2) = φ({θ(1)
c | c ∈ C }), where φ = Krum or any other existing
robust aggregation heuristic. For any other FL round t > 1, the
server can use the past l > 0 historical observations Θt−l:t−1
to estimate the best MAR coefficients Ω̂ = { Â, B̂} according
to (8). In general, 1 ≤ l ≤ t − 1; however, if we assume l
fixed at each round, the server will consider Θmax(1,t−l):t−1 past
observations. Again, independently of the value of l, MAR will
learn to predict the current matrix of weights only from the previously observed matrix. Therefore, each matrix used for training {Θt− j−1 }l−1
j=0 has the same size d × m, as it contains exclusively the m updates received at the round t − j − 1. Of course,

employing a higher order MAR(w) model with w > 1 would
require extending each observed matrix to d × h (m < h ≤ K),
as detailed in Section IV-A. This is to track the local updates
sent by selected clients across multiple historical rounds.
2) Anomaly Score Computation: At the generic FL round
t > 1, we compute the anomaly score using the estimated MAR
forecasting model as follows. Let Θt be the matrix of observed
weights. This matrix may contain one or more corrupted local
models from malicious clients. Then, we compute the mdimensional anomaly score vector s(t) , where s(t) [c] = s(t)
c ,
as in (4). A critical choice concerns the function δ used to
measure the distance between the observed vector of weights
sent by each selected client and the vector of weights predicted
by MAR. In this work, we set δ(u, v) = ||u − v||22 , where || · ||22
is the squared L2 -norm. In this work, we set δ = || · ||2 as L2 norm; other functions can also be used (e.g., cosine distance).
Choosing the best δ is outside the scope of this work, and we
leave it to future study.
According to one of the filtering strategies discussed in
Section IV-C, we retain only the k clients with the smallest
anomaly scores. The remaining m − k clients are considered
malicious; thus, they are discarded and do not contribute to the
aggregation run by the server as if they were never selected.
At the next round t + 1, we may want to refresh our estimation of the MAR model, i.e., to update the coefficient matrices
Â and B̂. We do so by considering the latest observed Θt and
the other l − 1 previous matrices of local updates, using the
same sliding window of size l. Since the observed matrix Θt
contains m−k potentially malicious clients, we cannot use it asis. Otherwise, if any of the spotted malicious clients is selected
again at round t + 1, we may alter the estimation of Â and
B̂ with possibly corrupted matrix columns. To overcome this
problem, we replace the original Θt with Θ0t before, feeding
it to train the new MAR model. Specifically, Θ0t is obtained
from Θt by substituting the m − k anomalous columns either
with the parameter vectors from the same clients observed
at time t − 1, which are supposed to be still legitimate or
the current global model. The advantage of this solution is
twofold. On the one hand, a client labeled as malicious at FL
round t would likely still be considered so at t + 1 if it keeps
perturbing its local weights, thus improving robustness. On the
other hand, our solution allows malicious clients to alternate
legitimate behaviors without being banned, speeding up model
convergence. Notice that the two considerations above might
not be valid if we updated the MAR model using the original,
partially corrupted Θt . Indeed, in the first case, the distance
between two successive poisoned models by the same client
would reasonably be small. So, the client’s anomaly score
will likely drop to non-alarming values, thereby increasing
the number of false negatives. In the second case, the distance
between a corrupted and a legitimate model would likely be
large. Thus, a malicious client will maintain its anomaly score
high even if it acts honestly, impacting the number of false
positives.
C. A Step-by-Step Example
To better clarify how FLANDERS works, consider the
following practical example.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS

Suppose an FL system consists of a centralized server
and 10 clients c1 , . . . , c10 ; furthermore, at each round, 4
of those clients are randomly chosen for training. At the
very first round (t = 1), let C (1) = {c2 , c3 , c7 , c9 } be the
set of 4 clients selected by the server. Hence, the server
sends the current global model θ(1) ∈ Rd to each of those
clients and collects the d × 4 matrix of updated local models
(1) (1) (1)
Θ1 = [θ(1)
2 , θ3 , θ7 , θ9 ]. Therefore, it computes the new
(1)
global model θ(2) = φ({θ(1)
c | c ∈ C }). Notice that, at this stage,
no anomaly score can be computed as FLANDERS cannot
take advantage of any historical observations of local model
updates. As such, if one (or more) selected clients in the very
first round are malicious, plain FedAvg may not detect those.
To overcome this problem, FLANDERS should be paired with
one of the existing robust aggregation heuristics at t = 1. For
example, φ = {Trimmed Mean, Krum, Bulyan}.
At the next round (t = 2), FLANDERS can start using
past observations (i.e., only Θ1 ) to estimate the best MAR
coefficients Ω̂ = { Â, B̂} according to Eq. (8) above. Suppose
C (2) = {c1 , c3 , c6 , c9 } is the set of 4 clients selected by the
(2) (2) (2)
server at the second round. Let Θ2 = [θ(2)
1 , θ3 , θ6 , θ9 ] be
the local models sent by the clients to the server. Moreover,
(2) (2) (2) (2)
Θ̂2 = f (Θ1 ; Ω̂) = [θ̂2 , θ̂3 , θ̂7 , θ̂9 ] are the local models
predicted by MAR, using the previous set of observations.
It is worth noting that C (1) ∩ C (2) = {c3 , c9 }; the other two
clients, c1 and c6 , are considered “cold-start” since they are
selected for the first time or, in any case, they do not appear
in the historical observations used by MAR for predictions
(i.e., in the previous w = 1 matrices). Thus, we calculate the
following anomaly scores, according to Eq. 5:
(2)

(2)

(2)
(2)
(2)
• s(2)
3 = δ(θ3 , θ̂3 ) and s9 = δ(θ9 , θ̂9 ), i.e., we measure
the distance between the models actually sent by c3
and c9 and those predicted by MAR using the previous
observations (first condition);
(2)
(2) (2)
(2) (2)
• s(2)
1 = δ(θ , θ1 ) and s6 = δ(θ , θ6 ), i.e., we measure
the distance between the models actually sent by c1 and
c6 and the current global model at time t = 2, as those
clients were never picked before (second condition);
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
• s(2)
2 = s4 = s5 = s7 = s8 = s10 =⊥, i.e., these clients
were not selected at round t = 2, and therefore they will
not contribute to computing the new global model θ(3)
anyway (third condition).

Let us assume that c3 is a malicious client controlled by an
attacker. Moreover, suppose that this client started sending poisoned models since the very first round, i.e., θ(1)
3 was already
corrupted. In such a case, it is evident that if we had used plain
FedAvg at t = 1, this would have likely polluted the global
model θ(2) and, therefore, FLANDERS might fail to recognize
this as a malicious client due to a relatively low anomaly
score s(2)
3 . As stated before, the consequences of this edge
situation in which one or more malicious clients are picked at
the beginning of the FL training can be mitigated by replacing
FedAvg with one of the robust aggregation strategies available
in the literature, such as Trimmed Mean, Krum, or Bulyan.
However, suppose c3 is correctly spotted as malicious at
the end of round t = 2 due to its high anomaly score
(2)
s(2)
3 . Therefore, c3 (actually, θ3 ) will be discarded from the

9617

aggregation at the server’s end. Hence, FedAvg can now safely
be used; more generally, the server can restart running FedAvg
from t = 2 on, i.e., once FLANDERS can compute valid
anomaly scores. The server can now compute the updated
(2)
(2)
(2)
global model as θ(3) = φ({θ(2)
c | c ∈ C∗ }), where C∗ ⊂ C
contains the clients with the k smallest anomaly scores. For
(2)
instance, if k = 2 and C∗(2) = {c1 , c9 }, θ(3) = 1/2 ∗ (θ(2)
1 + θ9 ).
At the next round (t = 3), FLANDERS can use the previous
two observations Θ1 and Θ2 to refine the estimation of the
best MAR coefficients, again solving Eq. (8).7 However,
Θ2 cannot be fed as-is to re-train MAR since one of its
components – i.e., the local model θ(2)
3 sent by client c3 – has
been flagged as malicious. Otherwise, the resulting updated
MAR coefficients could be unreliable due to the propagation
of local poisoned models.
To overcome this problem, FLANDERS replaces the local
with either one of the
model marked as suspicious θ(2)
3
previously observed models from the same client that is
supposedly legitimate or the current global model. Since, in
this example, we assume c3 has been malicious from the first
round, we use the latter approach. Specifically, we change
(2)
(2) (2) (2)
substitutes
Θ2 with Θ02 = [θ(2)
1 , θ , θ6 , θ9 ], where θ
(2)
θ3 . As discussed at the end of Section V-B, this fix allows
FLANDERS to work even when a malicious client is picked
for two or more rounds consecutively.
(3) (3) (3) (3)
We can now compute Θ̂3 = f (Θ02 ; Ω̂) = [θ̂1 , θ̂3 , θ̂6 , θ̂9 ]
using the updated MAR, leveraging the previous set of
amended observations. Let C (3) = {c2 , c3 , c4 , c5 } denote the set
(3) (3) (3)
of clients selected at round 3 and Θ3 = [θ(3)
2 , θ3 , θ4 , θ5 ] be
the local models sent by the clients to the server. Thus, C (2) ∩
C (3) = {c3 }. The remaining three clients – c2 , c4 , and c5 – are
treated as “cold-start.” Specifically, c4 and c5 are selected for
the first time, while c2 , even though previously selected in the
first round, was not chosen at the previous round (2). As c2 was
not part of the historical observations used by MAR(1) to make
predictions, we need to treat it as if it were a cold-start client.
Therefore, anomaly scores are updated as follows:
(3) (3)
• s(3)
3 = δ(θ3 , θ̂3 ), i.e., we measure the distance between
the models actually sent by c3 and those predicted by
MAR using the previous observations (first condition);
(3)
(3)
(3) (3)
(3) (3)
(3) (3)
• s(3)
2 = δ(θ , θ2 ), s4 = δ(θ , θ4 ), and s5 = δ(θ , θ5 )
i.e., we measure the distance between the models actually
sent by c2 , c4 , and c5 and the current global model at
time t = 3, as those clients were never picked before or
did not appear in the previous observations used to make
predictions (second condition);
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
• s(3)
1 = s6 = s7 = s8 = s9 = s10 =⊥, i.e., these clients
were not selected at round t = 3, and therefore they will
not contribute to computing the new global model θ(4)
anyway (third condition).
Generally, the process above continues until the global model
converges.
D. FLANDERS’ Pseudocode
We present the pseudocode of a hypothetical FL server
that integrates FLANDERS into the model aggregation stage.
7 In general, FLANDERS uses l past observations Θ

max(1,t−l):t−1 .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Algorithm 1 FLANDERS-Server

Algorithm 3 ColdStart

The main server-side loop is shown in Algorithm 1, whereas
Algorithm 2 details the computation of anomaly scores, which
is at the heart of the FLANDERS filter.

i-th m × m matrix8 B̂ costs O(m3 ) + O(d2 m). Thus, a single
iteration costs O(d3 ) + O(dm2 ) + O(m3 ) + O(d2 m), namely
O(d3 ) or O(m3 ),9 depending what term dominates between
d (the number of weights) and m (the number of clients).
ALS performs the two steps above for N iterations (e.g., in
this work, we set N = 100). Second, the computation of
the anomaly score costs O(md) as it measures the distance
between observed and predicted local updates from all the
m selected clients. Third, every time the MAR model is
refreshed, we need to rerun ALS; in the worst-case scenario,
we might want to re-estimate Â and B̂ at every single FL
round.
It is worth noticing that performing ALS directly on high
dimensional parameter space (d) in standard FL settings with
loads of clients (m) may be unfeasible (e.g., when d and
m range from 106 to 109 ). To keep the computational cost
tractable (and limit the impact of the curse of dimensionality),
in our experiments, where d  m, we reduce dimensionality
via random sampling on the parameter space, as proposed by
[9]. Specifically, we sample a fixed subset of d̃ < d model
parameters for ALS, with d̃ set to 500. We adopt a taskagnostic approach, keeping this number constant across all
experiments to ensure a fair comparison and demonstrate the
general applicability of our method without task-specific tuning. The choice of 500 is not a critical hyperparameter, as our
results are robust across a range of values; our ablation study
in Section VI-D (see Table XIV) shows that FLANDERS’
detection performance remains perfect even when reducing
the number of sampled parameters to as low as 100. While
we use random sampling for simplicity, neural networks often
exhibit correlated parameters, more sophisticated solutions
may remove all parameters that show obvious dependency
from other ones.

E. Computational Complexity Analysis

A. Experimental Setup

To train our MAR forecasting model, we first need to run
the ALS algorithm, which estimates the coefficient matrices Â
and B̂. ALS iteratively performs two steps to compute Â and
B̂, respectively. At the generic i-th iteration, computing the i-th
d ×d matrix Â costs O(d3 )+O(dm2 ); similarly, computing the

1) Datasets, Tasks, and FL Models: We consider four public datasets for image classification: MNIST, Fashion-MNIST,

Algorithm 2 FLANDERS-Filter

VI. E XPERIMENTS

8 It is worth remarking that, using MAR(1), h = m and thus B̂ has size m
× m.
9 O(d 2.376 ) or O(m2.376 ) using the Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm [35].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS

9619

TABLE II
E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP : DATASETS , TASKS , AND FL M ODELS C ONSIDERED

TABLE III
D ESCRIPTION OF H YPERPARAMETERS

CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100. All datasets are randomly shuffled
and partitioned into two disjoint sets: 80% is used for training
and 20% for testing. We train a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)
on MNIST and Fashion-MNIST and a Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 (MobileNet
[36]). All models are trained by minimizing cross-entropy loss.
In Table II, we report the full details of our experimental
setup concerning the datasets used, their associated tasks, and
the models (along with their hyperparameters) trained on the
simulated FL environment, i.e., Flower.10 Table III shows the
description of the hyperparameters.
The MLP for the MNIST dataset is a 2-layer fully connected feed-forward neural network, whereas the MLP for
the Fashion-MNIST dataset is a 4-layer fully connected feedforward neural network. Both MLPs are trained by minimizing
multiclass cross-entropy loss using Adam optimizer with batch
size equal to 32 [40]. The CNN used for CIFAR-10 is a 6layer convolutional neural network, while the CNN used for
CIFAR-100 is the well-known MobileNet architecture [36].
Both CNNs are trained by minimizing multiclass cross-entropy
loss via stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with batch size
equal to 32 [41].
At each FL round, every client performs one training epoch
of Adam/SGD, which corresponds to the number of iterations
needed to “see” all the training instances once, when divided
into batches of size 32. In any case, the updated local model
is sent to the central server for aggregation.

10 https://flower.dev/

TABLE IV
M AIN P ROPERTIES OF O UR FL E NVIRONMENT S IMULATED ON F LOWER

We run our experiments on a machine equipped with an
AMD Ryzen 9, 64 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA 4090 GPU
with 24 GB VRAM.
2) FL Simulation Environment: To simulate a realistic
FL environment, we integrate FLANDERS into Flower [42].
Moreover, we implement in Flower any defense baseline
considered that the framework does not natively provide. In
Table IV we synthetically report the hyperparameters.
We set the number K of FL clients to 100, and we assume
that the server selects all these clients in every FL round (m =
K). We suppose the attack starts at t = 1; then, we monitor
the performance of the global model until t = T = 50. Recall
that we select the malicious clients randomly across all the
participating ones; this implies that a single client can alternate
between legitimate and malicious behavior over successive FL
rounds.
3) Non-IID Local Training Data: We simulate non-iid
clients’ training data distributions following [43]. We assume
every client training example is drawn independently with
class labels following a categorical distribution over N classes
parameterized by a vector q such that qi ≥ 0, i ∈ [1, . . . , N] and
||q||1 = 1. To synthesize a population of non-identical clients,
we draw q ∼ Dir(αD , p) from a Dirichlet distribution, where
p characterizes a prior class distribution over N classes, and
αD > 0 is a concentration parameter controlling the identicalness among clients. With αD → ∞, all clients have identical
label distributions; on the other extreme, with αD → 0, each
client holds examples from only one class chosen at random.
In our experiments, we set αD = 0.5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9620

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE V
K EY PARAMETER S ETTINGS FOR E ACH ATTACK S TRATEGY C ONSIDERED

B. Attacks
We assess the robustness of FLANDERS under the attacks
introduced in III. For each attack, we vary the number b = dr ∗
me, r ∈ [0, 1] of malicious clients, where r = {0, 0.2, 0.6, 0.8}.
Ultimately, we analyze an attacker’s performance embedded
with a MAR model.
Below, we describe the critical parameters for each attack
considered, which are also summarized in Table V.
1) GAUSS: This attack has only one parameter: the magnitude σ of the perturbation to apply. We set σ = 10 for all
the experiments.
2) LIE: This method has no parameters to set.
3) OPT: The parameter τ represents the minimum value
that λ can assume. Below this threshold, the halving search
stops. As suggested by the authors, we set τ = 10−5 .
4) AGR-MM: In addition to the threshold τ, AGR-MM uses
the perturbation vectors ∇ p in combination with the scaling
coefficient γ to optimize. We set τ = 10−5 and ∇ p = {std},
which is the vector obtained by computing the parameters’
inverse of the standard deviation. For Krum, we set ∇ p = {uv},
which is the inverse unit vector perturbation.
C. Evaluation
We evaluate four key aspects of FLANDERS. Firstly,
we test its ability to detect malicious clients against the
best-competing filtering strategy, FLDetector. Secondly, we
measure the accuracy improvement of the global model when
FLANDERS is paired with “vanilla” FedAvg and the most
popular robust aggregation baselines: FedMedian, Trimmed
Mean, Multi-Krum, Bulyan, DnC. Thirdly, we analyze the
cost-benefit trade-off of FLANDERS. Lastly, we test the
robustness of our method against adaptive attacks.
1) Malicious Detection Accuracy: Table VI shows the
precision (P) and recall (R) of FLDetector and FLANDERS
in filtering out malicious clients across different datasets and
attacks, with r = 0.2 (20% evil participants in the FL systems). Remarkably, FLANDERS successfully detects all and
only malicious clients across every attack setting except for
OPT, outperforming its main competitor, FLDetector. This is
further confirmed by Table VII, which shows that our method
generally provides much higher protection than FLDetector
when combined with standard FedAvg.
Better results are observed for extreme attack settings
(r = 0.8) in Tables VIII, and IX, where OPT maximizes the
distance between the legitimate models and the malicious ones
by erroneously thinking that the high number of its controlled
clients pierces through the aggregation functions.

Fig. 3. FedAvg with FLANDERS (left) vs. “vanilla” FedAvg (right). Accuracy
of the global model in each FL round under all attack strategies on the MNIST
dataset, with 80% of malicious clients. Attack starts at round t = 3.

Fig. 4. Accuracy vs. total training time (in seconds) of FedAvg and Bulyan
compared with their corresponding versions with FLANDERS as a filter for
the MNIST (left) and CIFAR-10 (right) datasets.

FLDetector fails to distinguish malicious updates from
legitimate ones because (i) the anomaly score is based on
approximating a single Hessian matrix that must be close to
all legitimate clients, making it inadequate for highly non-iid
settings, where malicious updates can be similar to legitimate
ones; and (ii) the suspicious scores are computed as the
average normalized Euclidean distance of the past iterations.
Although this is coherent and works well with a threat model
where the malicious clients are always the same across all
rounds, FLANDERS does not make such an assumption,
making FLDetector unable to recognize malicious updates
arriving for the first time from an ex-legitimate client.
2) Aggregation Robustness Lift: We proceed to evaluate the
enhancement that FLANDERS provides to the robustness of
the global model. Specifically, we measure the best accuracy
of the global model under several attack strengths using all
the baselines without and with FLANDERS as a pre-filtering
strategy. Table X shows that FLANDERS keeps high accuracy
for the best global model under extreme attacks (r = 0.8) when
used before every aggregation method, including Multi-Krum
and Bulyan, which would otherwise be inapplicable in such
strong attack scenarios.
In Figure 3 we compare the accuracy of the global model
when using FLANDERS (left) and when using FedAvg (right)
across the whole FL training process. The left figure shows
how the evolution of the accuracy over multiple rounds
remains stable and similar to the one without any attack
(dashed line), while on the right the accuracy drops irremediably.
3) Cost-Benefit Analysis: Obviously, the robustness guaranteed by FLANDERS under extreme attack scenarios comes
with costs, especially due to the MAR estimation stage.
Fig. 4 depicts two scatter plots for the MNIST and CIFAR-10
datasets, focusing on a specific attack scenario (AGR-MM).
Each data point on a scatter plot represents a method under
one of two attack strengths considered (r = 0.2 and r = 0.6).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS

9621

TABLE VI
Precision (P) AND Recall (R) OF FLD ETECTOR AND FLANDERS IN D ETECTING M ALICIOUS C LIENTS ACROSS VARIOUS DATASETS AND ATTACKS
(r = 0.2; T = 50 ROUNDS )

TABLE VII
ACCURACY OF THE G LOBAL M ODEL U SING F EDAVG W ITH FLD ETECTOR AND FLANDERS (r = 0.2)

TABLE VIII
Precision (P) AND Recall (R) OF FLD ETECTOR AND FLANDERS IN D ETECTING M ALICIOUS C LIENTS ACROSS VARIOUS DATASETS AND ATTACKS
(r = 0.8; T = 50 ROUNDS )

TABLE IX
ACCURACY OF THE G LOBAL M ODEL U SING F EDAVG W ITH FLD ETECTOR AND FLANDERS (r = 0.8)

TABLE X
ACCURACY OF THE G LOBAL M ODEL U SING A LL THE BASELINE AGGREGATIONS W ITHOUT AND W ITH FLANDERS (r = 0.8)

These data points are specified by two coordinates: the overall
training time on the x-axis and the maximum accuracy of
the global model obtained after T = 50 FL rounds on the
y-axis.

Overall, the take-home message is as follows. In scenarios
with low attack strength (r = 0.2), Bulyan demonstrates superior accuracy, while FLANDERS + FedAvg offers comparable
performance with notably shorter training times. However,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9622

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE XI
ACCURACY OF THE G LOBAL M ODEL U SING F EDAVG AND M ULTI -K RUM ,
W ITH AND W ITHOUT FLANDERS, U NDER THE non-omniscient A DAP TIVE ATTACK

TABLE XII
ACCURACY OF THE G LOBAL M ODEL U SING F EDAVG AND M ULTI -K RUM ,
W ITH AND W ITHOUT FLANDERS, U NDER THE omniscient A DAPTIVE
ATTACK

Fig. 5. Evolution of anomaly scores of legitimate clients and malicious ones
(r = 0.3) using the Euclidean distance over time (K = 10; r = 0.3; T = 50
rounds).

as the attack strength increases (r = 0.6), Bulyan becomes
impractical, FedAvg alone proves ineffective, and FLANDERS
emerges as the optimal choice for achieving the best accuracy
vs. cost trade-off.
4) Robustness Against Adaptive Attacks: In this section,
we further validate the robustness of FLANDERS against
adaptive attacks. We consider a scenario where malicious
clients are aware that the FL server uses our method as a
pre-aggregation filter. Specifically, we focus on two levels of
knowledge. The first scenario assumes that malicious clients
e used by the FL
tentatively guess the subset of parameters (d)
server to estimate the MAR forecasting model. We refer to
this setting as non-omniscient. The second, more challenging
as well as unrealistic scenario assumes that malicious clients
know exactly which parameters are used by the FL server.
We call this second scenario omniscient. Obviously, the latter
penalizes FLANDERS way more than the former.
Specifically, we perform our experiments over T = 20
rounds with m = 20 clients, of which r = 0.2 (b = 5) are
malicious. The attacker constructs a matrix M = b×deusing the
local models generated by the corrupted clients. This matrix
M is then passed as input to the same forecasting model,
MAR, that the server uses to determine the legitimacy of
local models. The attacker, instead, substitutes the legitimate
parameters with those estimated by MAR, exploiting the fact
that these estimations do not perform like a legitimate local
model. This substitution ultimately hurts the accuracy of the
global model once the parameters are aggregated.
As introduced above, we first assume that the attacker is
non-omniscient, meaning it does not know which parameters
the server has selected for the MAR estimation. Instead, the
e Afterattacker selects the last layer of the neural network as d.
ward, we consider an omniscient attacker who knows exactly
which are the parameters selected by the server. In Table XI,
we show the results of the non-omniscient scenario, where
FLANDERS + Multi-Krum outperforms all other baselines
on all three datasets. Table XII, on the other hand, refers to
the omniscient scenario and demonstrates a different pattern,

where FedAvg and Multi-Krum alone perform better than
when coupled with FLANDERS. This is caused by the fact
that the attacker, knowing which are the parameters analyzed
by MAR server-side, crafts parameters that are very close
to the predictions of MAR causing the anomaly score to be
smaller than the one of a legitimately learned parameter. When
using FedAvg, instead, the impact of corrupted parameters is
mitigated by averaging a larger number of legitimate models
and because the corrupted models’ parameter values are not
too different, unlike in methods like OPT. On the other hand,
Multi-Krum selects parameters with more nearby neighbors,
and with only b = 5 corrupted clients, legitimate models likely
still have more and closer neighbors, effectively defending
against our adaptive attack.
D. Ablation Study
1) Distance Functions: As discussed in Section V-B, we
set δ to be the Euclidean distance throughout the work.
In this section, we analyze the impact of this choice and
u·v
substitute it with the Cosine distance (1 − ||u||·||v||
). First, in
Figure 5 and Figure 6 we show the evolution of anomaly
scores of legitimate clients and malicious ones using the
Euclidean/Cosine distance over time (we remind here that the
lower the anomaly score is, the better). Anomaly scores are
collapsed into two groups by averaging the anomaly scores of
legitimate clients and, separately, the ones of the attackers. To
evaluate the performance of the distance function we highlight
how large the area between the blue and the red lines is.
Clearly, a larger area suggests that the chosen δ better separates
the legit models from the malicious ones. By comparing the
two figures, it is evident that the Cosine distance struggles to
distinguish the models, especially in CIFAR-10 and under the
OPT attack over all datasets.
2) Random Choice of Parameters: In Section V-E we have
assumed to select d̃ = 500 parameters at random to reduce the
computation to estimate Â. Naturally, this is a simplification

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GABRIELLI et al.: SECURING FL AGAINST EXTREME MODEL POISONING ATTACKS

9623

TABLE XIII
AVERAGE A NOMALY S CORES OF L EGITIMATE M ODELS (L) VS . M ALICIOUS M ODELS (M) OVER A LL ROUNDS U SING THE E UCLIDEAN D ISTANCE AND
THE C OSINE D ISTANCE (r = 0.3; T = 50 ROUNDS )

TABLE XIV
Precision (P) AND Recall (R) OF FLANDERS IN D ETECTING M ALICIOUS
C LIENTS ACROSS VARIOUS ATTACKS AND VALUES OF d̃ (r = 0.8; T =
50 ROUNDS )

VII. L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
A. Efficiency/Feasibility
As we discussed in Section V-E, FLANDERS may suffer
from a high computational cost that could limit its deployment in practice. This concern holds particularly true for
cross-device FL configurations encompassing millions of edge
devices. Conversely, the impact on cross-silo FL scenarios
would be notably less pronounced. However, as we have
introduced FLANDERS as a versatile and robust aggregation approach applicable to diverse FL setups (cross-silo and
cross-device), there are implementation techniques available
to mitigate its complexity. For instance, methods like random
parameter sampling [9] can be employed, and we have already
incorporated them. Still, we plan to enhance the scalability of
FLANDERS further in future work. For example, we could
replace the standard matrix inversion algorithm with the more
efficient Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm [35] and find the
optimal frequency for re-estimating FLANDERS’ parameters,
instead of performing it during each FL round.
B. Cross-Device Setting

Fig. 6. Evolution of anomaly scores of legitimate clients and malicious ones
(r = 0.3) using the Cosine distance over time (K = 10; r = 0.3; T = 50
rounds).

and one should use different methods based on the real setup
scenario, carefully weighing all pros and cons. For example,
the authors of FLDetector reduce the server’s computational
burden by estimating a single Hessian matrix and comparing
it with all local models, but this reduces its performance in
non-iid scenarios.
Intuitively, because we deal with untargeted model poisoning attacks, anomalies on maliciously crafted local models
should be present on all parameters, so the value of d̃ is not
crucial. However, we have run experiments on a varying number of d̃ to verify that our results are not spoiled by the choice
of this parameter. Indeed, as shown in Table XIV, decreasing
the number of selected parameters does not influence the
performance of FLANDERS in our experimental setup.

The cross-device setting (thousands to millions of clients)
penalizes FLANDERS, as the server cannot select them all,
and the probability of choosing the same client in consecutive
rounds is low. However, FLANDERS is more appropriate in
cross-silo FL (tens to hundreds of clients) than in cross-device
settings. In fact, large attacks involving more than 50% of
clients are less feasible when the total number of participants
grows to the order of thousands [44]. In such cases, since
selected clients have little or no history, FLANDERS computes
distances between local updates and the last global model,
turning it into a heuristic similar to (Multi-)Krum. Thus,
FLANDERS will be comparable to any other heuristic.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
We introduced FLANDERS, a novel FL filter robust to
extreme untargeted model poisoning attacks, i.e., when malicious clients far exceed legitimate participants. FLANDERS
serves as a pre-processing step before applying aggregation rules, enhancing robustness across diverse hostile
settings.
FLANDERS treats the sequence of local model updates sent
by clients in each FL round as a matrix-valued time series.
Then, it identifies malicious client updates as outliers in this
time series using a matrix autoregressive forecasting model.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9624

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Experiments conducted in several non-iid FL setups demonstrated that existing (secure) aggregation methods further
improve their robustness when paired with FLANDERS.
Moreover, FLANDERS allows these methods to operate even
under extremely severe attack scenarios thanks to its ability
to accurately filter out every malicious client before the
aggregation process takes place.
In the future, we will address the primary limitations of this
work, as discussed in Section VII, and extend the capability
of FLANDERS to defend against targeted attacks.
R EFERENCES
[1]

B. McMahan and D. Ramage, “Federated learning: Collaborative
machine learning without centralized training data,” Int. J. Eng. Technol.
Manage. Sci., vol. 3, pp. 355–359, Sep. 2017.
[2] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[3] G. Costa, F. Pinelli, S. Soderi, and G. Tolomei, “Turning federated learning systems into covert channels,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 130642–130656, 2022.
[4] A. N. Bhagoji, S. Chakraborty, P. P. Mittal, and S. Calp, “Analyzing
federated learning through an adversarial lens,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., May 2019, pp. 634–643.
[5] D. Yin, Y. Chen, R. Kannan, and P. Bartlett, “Byzantine-robust distributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., Jul. 2018, pp. 5650–5659. [Online]. Available: https://
proceedings.mlr.press/v80/yin18a.html
[6] P. Blanchard, E. M. El Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer, “Machine
learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent,” in Proc.
NIPS, 2017, pp. 118–128.
[7] E. M. E. Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and S. Rouault, “The hidden vulnerability of distributed learning in Byzantium,” in Proc. ICML, J. G. Dy
and A. Krause, Eds., 2018, pp. 3518–3527. [Online]. Available: http://
proceedings.mlr.press/v80/mhamdi18a.html
[8] S. Shen, S. Tople, and P. Saxena, “AUROR: Defending against poisoning
attacks in collaborative deep learning systems,” in Proc. 32nd Annu.
Conf. Comput. Secur. Appl., 2016, pp. 508–519.
[9] V. Shejwalkar and A. Houmansadr, “Manipulating the Byzantine: Optimizing model poisoning attacks and defenses for federated learning,” in
Proc. NDSS, 2021.
[10] X. Cao, M. Fang, J. Liu, and N. Zhenqiang Gong, “FLTrust:
Byzantine-robust federated learning via trust bootstrapping,” 2020,
arXiv:2012.13995.
[11] R. Chen, H. Xiao, and D. Yang, “Autoregressive models for matrixvalued time series,” J. Econometrics, vol. 222, no. 1, pp. 539–560, May
2021.
[12] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov.
2020, pp. 841–850.
[13] Y. Lu and L. Fan, “An efficient and robust aggregation algorithm for
learning federated CNN,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Signal Process. Mach.
Learn., Oct. 2020, pp. 1–7.
[14] J. Dean et al., “Large scale distributed deep networks,” in Proc. 25th
Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2012, pp. 1223–1231.
[15] J. Konečný, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P. Richtšrik, A. T. Suresh, and
D. Bacon, “Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication
efficiency,” 2016, arXiv:1610.05492.
[16] B. I. P. Rubinstein et al., “ANTIDOTE: Understanding and defending against poisoning of anomaly detectors,” in Proc. 9th ACM
SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas., Nov. 2009, pp. 1–14, doi: 10.1145/
1644893.1644895.
[17] B. Biggio, B. Nelson, and P. Laskov, “Poisoning attacks against support
vector machines,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2012,
pp. 1467–1474. [Online]. Available: http://icml.cc/2012/papers/880.pdf
[18] B. Biggio, L. Didaci, G. Fumera, and F. Roli, “Poisoning attacks
to compromise face templates,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Biometrics (ICB),
Madrid, Spain, Jun. 2013, pp. 1–7, doi: 10.1109/ICB.2013.6613006.
[19] X. Huang, B. Biggio, G. Brown, G. Fumera, C. Eckert, and F. Roli, “Is
feature selection secure against training data poisoning,” in Proc. ICML,
2018, pp. 1689–1698. [Online]. Available: http://proceedings.mlr.press/
v37/xiao15.html

[20] B. Li, Y. Wang, A. Singh, and Y. Vorobeychik, “Data poisoning attacks
on factorization-based collaborative filtering,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2016,
pp. 1885–1893. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper/2016/hash/83fa5a432ae55c253d0e60dbfa716723-Abstract.html
[21] G. Yang, N. Z. Gong, and Y. Cai, “Fake co-visitation injection attacks
to recommender systems,” in Proc. NDSS, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss2017/ndss-2017-programme/fakeco-visitation-injection-attacks-recommender-systems/
[22] M. Jagielski, A. Oprea, B. Biggio, C. Liu, C. Nita-Rotaru, and B. Li,
“Manipulating machine learning: Poisoning attacks and countermeasures
for regression learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May
2018, pp. 19–35.
[23] S. Lu, R. Li, X. Chen, and Y. Ma, “Defense against local model
poisoning attacks to Byzantine-robust federated learning,” Frontiers
Comput. Sci., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1605–1622, Dec. 2022.
[24] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov,
“How to backdoor federated learning,” in Proc. AISTATS, 2018,
pp. 2938–2948.
[25] J. R. Douceur, “The Sybil attack,” in Proc. IPTPS, 2002, pp. 251–260,
doi: 10.1007/3-540-45748-8 24.
[26] M. Baruch, G. Baruch, and Y. Goldberg, “A little is enough: Circumventing defenses for distributed learning,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2019,
pp. 8632–8642. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper/2019/hash/ec1c59141046cd1866bbbcdfb6ae31d4-Abstract.html
[27] J. Shi, W. Wan, S. Hu, J. Lu, and L. Yu Zhang, “Challenges and
approaches for mitigating Byzantine attacks in federated learning,” 2021,
arXiv:2112.14468.
[28] N. Rodrı́guez-Barroso, D. Jiménez-López, M. V. Luzón, F. Herrera, and
E. Martı́nez-Cámara, “Survey on federated learning threats: Concepts,
taxonomy on attacks and defences, experimental study and challenges,”
Inf. Fusion, vol. 90, pp. 148–173, Jan. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1566253522001439
[29] C. Xie, O. Koyejo, and I. Gupta, “Generalized Byzantine-tolerant SGD,”
2018, arXiv:1802.10116.
[30] I. Diakonikolas, G. Kamath, D. M. Kane, J. Li, A. Moitra, and
A. Stewart, “Being robust (in high dimensions) can be practical,” in
Proc. ICML, 2017, pp. 999–1008.
[31] Z. Zhang, X. Cao, J. Jia, and N. Z. Gong, “FLDetector: Defending federated learning against model poisoning attacks via detecting malicious
clients,” in Proc. KDD, 2022, pp. 2545–2555.
[32] D. J. Albers and G. Hripcsak, “Using time-delayed mutual information
to discover and interpret temporal correlation structure in complex
populations,” Chaos, Interdiscipl. J. Nonlinear Sci., vol. 22, no. 1, Mar.
2012.
[33] P. Billingsley, Probability and Measure. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley,
2017.
[34] Y. Koren, R. Bell, and C. Volinsky, “Matrix factorization techniques
for recommender systems,” Computer, vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 30–37, Aug.
2009, doi: 10.1109/MC.2009.263.
[35] D. Coppersmith and S. Winograd, “Matrix multiplication via arithmetic progressions,” J. Symbolic Comput., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 251–280,
Mar. 1990. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0747717108800132
[36] A. G. Howard et al., “MobileNets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications,” 2017, arXiv:1704.04861.
[37] (1998). MNIST Dataset. [Online]. Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/
mnist/
[38] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf. (2017). Fashion-MNIST: A
Novel Image Dataset for Benchmarking Machine Learning Algorithms.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/zalandoresearch/fashion-mnist
[39] (2009). CIFAR-10/CIFAR-100 Datasets. [Online]. Available: https://
www.cs.toronto.edu/ kriz/cifar.html
[40] S. Li, E. C. H. Ngai, F. Ye, L. Ju, T. Zhang, and T. Voigt, “Blades: A
unified benchmark suite for Byzantine attacks and defenses in federated
learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 9th Int. Conf. Internet-of-Things Design
Implement. (IoTDI), May 2024, pp. 158–169.
[41] (2023). Training a Classifier. [Online]. Available: https://pytorch.org/
tutorials/beginner/blitz/cifar10 tutorial.html
[42] D. J. Beutel et al., “Flower: A friendly federated learning research
framework,” 2020, arXiv:2007.14390.
[43] T.-M. H. Hsu, H. Qi, and M. Brown, “Measuring the effects of nonidentical data distribution for federated visual classification,” 2019,
arXiv:1909.06335.
[44] V. Shejwalkar, A. Houmansadr, P. Kairouz, and D. Ramage, “Back to the
drawing board: A critical evaluation of poisoning attacks on production
federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2022,
pp. 1354–1371. [Online]. Available: https://par.nsf.gov/biblio/10355494

Authorized licensed use limited to: Biblioteca de la Universidad de Extremadura. Downloaded on March 15,2026 at 14:02:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

